“Easter, 1916” (1916) is a poem written by William Butler Yeats in the aftermath of the Easter Rising, a week-long uprising against British rule in Ireland; the British government crushed the revolt and executed its leaders. The poem is in four stanzas, three of which end with the refrain “A terrible beauty is born.” In the poem, Yeats describes his past interactions with the revolutionaries, noting “I have met them at close of day” and “I have passed with a nod of the head / Or polite meaningless words” before stating “All changed, changed utterly.” In the last stanza, Yeats specifically memorializes the executed leaders “MacDonagh and MacBride / And Connolly and Pearse.”
“The Second Coming” (1920) is a poem by William Butler Yeats that uses apocalyptic imagery to describe post-World War I Europe, which at the time was also gripped by a deadly flu pandemic. The poem opens by stating “Turning and turning in the widening gyre / The falcon cannot hear the falconer; / Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold.” Yeats further notes “Surely some revelation is at hand; / Surely the Second Coming is at hand” and concludes the poem by asking “what rough beast, its hour come round at last, / Slouches towards Bethlehem to be born?” Chinua Achebe used a line from Yeats’s poem to title his novel Things Fall Apart.
Ulysses (1922) is a novel by James Joyce that is often ranked as one of the greatest novels ever written. The majority of the novel chronicles a day in the life of Leopold Bloom; other principal characters in the work include Bloom’s wife Molly (who is having an affair with Blazes Boylan), Buck Mulligan, and Stephen Dedalus (the protagonist of Joyce’s A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man and modeled on Joyce himself). Joyce largely based the structure of his tale on Homer’s Odyssey. The novel is noted for its use of a stream-of-consciousness technique, such as in the last line, when Molly Bloom thinks “yes I said yes I will Yes.” Ulysses takes place on June 16, 1904 in Dublin; fans of the novel have subsequently celebrated June 16 as “Bloomsday.”