Miles Davis (1926–1991) was a trumpeter who developed or influenced the development of cool jazz, modal jazz, hard bop, electronic jazz, and jazz fusion over his long career. Davis’s 1959 modal jazz album Kind of Blue—which he recorded with the members of his First Great Quintet (which generally existed in the later 1950s), including John Coltrane—is widely considered to be the greatest jazz recording of all time. It includes the track “So What.” Davis’s Second Great Quintet (1960s) featured Herbie Hancock on piano and Wayne Shorter on sax and formed the core of the group that recorded Davis’s album In a Silent Way, which marked Davis’s first use of electric instruments and first venture into a more rock-and-roll fusion aesthetic. Davis’s early career was marked by his struggles with heroin addiction. His other notable albums include Sketches of Spain and Birth of the Cool.
John Coltrane (1926–1967) was a saxophonist who was an influential figure in hard bop and modal jazz. Coltrane played saxophone on many other musicians’s landmark albums; for example, he was the tenor sax player on Miles Davis’s album Kind of Blue. His own major albums included Giant Steps, whose title track features chords that move down by major thirds (and which became known as the Coltrane changes) and a sax solo that led Coltrane’s playing to be described as “sheets of sound.” Coltrane’s quartet, which usually included pianist McCoy Tyner and drummer Elvin Jones, produced the album My Favorite Things, whose title track is a cover of a song from The Sound of Music. Coltrane experienced a religious awakening while overcoming his addiction to heroin; his album A Love Supreme concludes with Coltrane “narrating” the words of a devotional poem via his sax playing. Following his death at age 40, Coltrane was named a saint of the African Orthodox Church.
Louis Armstrong (1901–1971) was a renowned cornet and trumpet player, nicknamed “Satchmo” and “Pops.” Armstrong grew up in New Orleans and is among the best-known performers of the Dixieland style of jazz. Armstrong got early experience playing in bands led by Kid Ory and King Oliver before heading up his own group known as the “Hot Five,” whose members included both Kid Ory and Armstrong’s then-wife, pianist Lil Hardin Armstrong. The Hot Five’s recording of the track “Heebie Jeebies” features Armstrong’s scat singing, or singing using random, nonsense syllables. Armstrong was a renowned vocalist as well as instrumentalist, with his recordings of the songs “What a Wonderful World” and “Hello, Dolly!” His notable instrumental jazz compositions include “Potato Head Blues.”